doc/index.adoc, before:

= Onion Architecture Governance Sample

This document describes some sample architecture constraints for an onion architecture. It contains the various concepts
and constraints to be applied to and checked against the code base using jqAssistant.


== Concepts

Concepts describe higher-level building blocks that form part of an onion architecture. These concepts are represented
in the code base as stereotype (using annotations) and build up the architecture language used to express the actual
architecture rules.


=== Domain Ring

The domain ring represents the most inner ring of an onion architecture. It contains all elements that represent the
business logic of the domain.

_jqAssistant Concept Definition_
[[sample:PackageOfDomainRingConcept]]
[source,cypher,role=concept]
----
 MATCH     (p:Package)
 WHERE     p.fqn CONTAINS '.domain'
   SET     p:DomainRing
RETURN     p.fqn
----


=== Aggregate

An aggregate represents a main concept of the domain model. It encapsulates state and business logic and is responsible
for enforcing business invariants. Aggregates are part of the domain ring.

_jqAssistant Concept Definition_
[[sample:AggregateConcept]]
[source,cypher,role=concept]
----
 MATCH     (t:Type)-[:ANNOTATED_BY]->()-[:OF_TYPE]->(a:Annotation)
 WHERE     a.fqn = "com.github.cstettler.sample.onionjqassistant.stereotype.Aggregate"
   SET     t:Aggregate
RETURN     t.fqn
----

(more concepts to follow)


== Constraints

Constraints define rules that the implementation of an onion architecture have to follow. Constraints are expressed
using the architecture language defined by concepts.

=== C1 - Aggregates must reside in Domain Ring

As aggregates contain business logic and related state, and only the domain ring must contain business logic, aggregates
must reside in the domain ring.

_jqAssistant Constraint Definition_
[[sample:AggregateMustResideInDomainRingConstraint]]
[source,cypher,role=constraint,requiresConcepts="sample:AggregateConcept,sample:PackageOfDomainRingConcept"]
----
    MATCH  (a:Aggregate)<-[:CONTAINS]-(p:Package)
WHERE NOT  p:DomainRing
   RETURN  a.fqn AS AggregateInWrongRing
----

(more constraints to follow)

Commit message:

added additional concept and constraint for detecting illegal dependencies between aggregate and application services

doc/index.adoc, after:

= Onion Architecture Governance Sample

This document describes some sample architecture constraints for an onion architecture. It contains the various concepts
and constraints to be applied to and checked against the code base using jqAssistant.


== Concepts

Concepts describe higher-level building blocks that form part of an onion architecture. These concepts are represented
in the code base as stereotype (using annotations) and build up the architecture language used to express the actual
architecture rules.


=== Domain Ring

The domain ring represents the most inner ring of an onion architecture. It contains all elements that represent the
business logic of the domain.

_jqAssistant Concept Definition_
[[sample:PackageOfDomainRingConcept]]
[source,cypher,role=concept]
----
 MATCH     (p:Package)
 WHERE     p.fqn CONTAINS '.domain'
   SET     p:DomainRing
RETURN     p.fqn
----


=== Aggregate

An aggregate represents a main concept of the domain model. It encapsulates state and business logic and is responsible
for enforcing business invariants. Aggregates are part of the domain ring.

_jqAssistant Concept Definition_
[[sample:AggregateConcept]]
[source,cypher,role=concept]
----
 MATCH     (t:Type)-[:ANNOTATED_BY]->()-[:OF_TYPE]->(a:Annotation)
 WHERE     a.fqn = "com.github.cstettler.sample.onionjqassistant.stereotype.Aggregate"
   SET     t:Aggregate
RETURN     t.fqn
----

=== Application Service

An application service represents the boundary between the infrastructure / external context and the domain. It provides
access to the business logic of the domain, but does not implement domain logic itself.

_jqAssistant Concept Definition_
[[sample:ApplicationServiceConcept]]
[source,cypher,role=concept]
----
 MATCH     (t:Type)-[:ANNOTATED_BY]->()-[:OF_TYPE]->(a:Annotation)
 WHERE     a.fqn = "com.github.cstettler.sample.onionjqassistant.stereotype.ApplicationService"
   SET     t:ApplicationService
RETURN     t.fqn
----

(more concepts to follow)


== Constraints

Constraints define rules that the implementation of an onion architecture have to follow. Constraints are expressed
using the architecture language defined by concepts.

=== C1 - Aggregates must reside in Domain Ring

As aggregates contain business logic and related state, and only the domain ring must contain business logic, aggregates
must reside in the domain ring.

_jqAssistant Constraint Definition_
[[sample:AggregateMustResideInDomainRingConstraint]]
[source,cypher,role=constraint,requiresConcepts="sample:AggregateConcept,sample:PackageOfDomainRingConcept"]
----
    MATCH  (a:Aggregate)<-[:CONTAINS]-(p:Package)
WHERE NOT  p:DomainRing
   RETURN  a.fqn AS Aggregate
----


=== C2 - Aggregates must not use Application Services

As application services represent the boundary of the domain towards external contexts, aggregates must not invoke
application services.

_jqAssistant Constraint Definition_
[[sample:AggregatesMustNotUseApplicationServicesConstraint]]
[source,cypher,role=constraint,requiresConcepts="sample:AggregateConcept,sample:ApplicationServiceConcept"]
----
    MATCH  (a:Aggregate)-[:DEPENDS_ON]->(s:ApplicationService)
   RETURN  a.fqn AS Aggregate, s.fqn AS ApplicationService
----

(more constraints to follow)
